

Mario dos Reis <mariodosreis@yahoo.com>
To: brixton_climbers@yahoogroups.com

Mon, Jul 17, 2006 at 5:45 PM

Well lets face it, weather you love them or you hate
them, Briston Wall is about cracks. To overcome them
you should make use of that old fashioned climbing
technique of jamming your fists, hands, fingers or
even your feet. So much pain, but also so much
pleasure when you finally overcome that hard crack
that seemed impossible!

Having this in mind, two Brixton clmbers decided to go
on an unofficial expedition to what is supposedly the
crack capital of Britain: Millstone Edge in the Peak
District. A sheer set of quarried gritstone faces,
where quarrying techniques have created 'splitters',
parallel sided cracks that run for dozens of metres,
splitting up inmaculately flat rock walls. Would this
crag live up to its reputation?

Planning was minimal: a look at the map suggested that
it was very close to Sheffield, so a bus from London
to this destination was taken (£17 return), and a
couple of questions at a UK climbing forum made it
clear that bus 272 from Sheffield drops you right at
the crag (ask for the Surprise car park, less than £1
one way). The problem was were to camp, but the
closest camp site is several miles away, so not an
option. More questions at UK climbing made it clear
that bivying, or even camping at the quarry is
possible (although the legality of this is hotly
disputed).

With this information in mind, Eric and I departed
from London at 6:00 pm with a couple of sleeping bags,
no tent, and enough food and water for the weekend.
The bus ride went smoothly, and at the Sheffiled
interchange we caught the last bus to Hathersage (272)
at 10:20 pm. The bus rides along the moors, beautiful
and eerie at night. The bus suddenly stopped and the
driver informed us that we had arrived to our
destination, the Surprise View Car Park. The locals on
the bus looked at the two foreigners that were about
to get down so late at night in such a desolated
place, with a mixed face of compassion and
bewilderment.

At the car park we hadn't had a clue of what to do so
we started off along the widest path we could find. It
quickly took us into some woods, and then out again
into the moors. We met strange looking rock
formations, their eerie silhouettes in the dark shaped
by the wind and rain by thousands of years of
exposure. After some walking through boulders and
boulders, it became clear that we were not at where we
were supposed to be. The wind was strong and the air
very chilly. We simply decided to stop right there,
and dozed off under a perfectly clear, starred sky,
with the noise of sheep clumsily grazing around.

The morning was clear and chilly. We quickly noticed
that we had walked pass the quarry, which we had left
well behind and to our left. We simply took the wrong
path at the car park! Quick breakfast, packed the
bags, and a few minutes later we were at the bottom of
the quarry. Simply breathtaking. All the climbs are
steep and long, the quarry subjected to a strange
geometrical pattern imposed on it by humandkind. We
found plenty of people bivying and two tents so the
situation regarding this seems to be ok.

One of the nicest things about this crag is that many
(most) of its classics borrow names from London
places, so being there feels kind of familiar. There
are climbs called Lambeth Chimney and Brixton Road,
routes that we obviously avoided (anybody knows the
perils of wandering in dark places with such names!).

My eyes were quickly fixed on Embankment Wall, which
according to the guide book is "a superb sheet of rock
named after a similar but inferior feature in London".
Couldn't agree more. To its left side two parallel
running cracks caught my attention: Embankment 2 (VS
4c). That was the first lead of the day and a superb
introduction to this magnificent place. Strenuous,
where you can jam everything you have, fists, arms,
elbows and even your whole legs, and were protection
is sound and abundant. Eric quickly followed, although
in his characteristic style he lay-backed it!

The next challenge was Great Portland Street, HVS 5b,
were a hard mantelshelf right at the beginning is the
crux of the pitch, followed by exquisitely sustained,
technical 5a bridging up a groove to the top. Well,
after something like 7 attemps at this 'mantelshelf' I
had to give up! GRRRRR. Never felt so powerless!

Eric, already a strong climber, had never done any
trad climbing before, so it was his turn to show what
he was made of. Back to Embankment wall where he
succesfully, and impressively tackled the first pitch
of Embankment 1, (VS 4c). After that, I followed with
The Mall (VS 4c), a perfect corner crack, involving
one of the most varied climbings I've seen, and
strangely reminiscent of the lower section of Cenotaph
Corner (Wales, E1 5c). Next to The Mall is the really
impressive London Wall, E5 6a. A relentless thin
finger crack. This one is in my wishlist!

The day finished off nicely with Bond Street (HVS 5a),
another superb fist jamming classic, and with Eric's
onsight demonstration of Great Slab (HS 4b).

The quarry is west facing, which means you get a
breath taking view of the sunset over the Hope Valley.
But it also means that the climbs get really hot after
midday as the sun moves and unkindly bathes the walls
with its rays!

After the heat, the climbs, and the dehydration, it
was high time to find the nearest pub. We decided to
head downhill following the main A road towards
Hathersage, and we quickly arrived at the Millstone
Inn. What a pleasant surprise to find such a nice pub
after a mere 10 min walk! Someone at UK climbing had
warned us that "there were no reliable water sources
at Millstone", but with a pub so close by, he couldn't
be more wrong! Sat outside and ordered some food. I
went for the classic fish and chips, and oh mates, I
can tell you, maybe I was hallucinating but that was
the biggest and most succulent piece of cod I've ever
seen! Honestly, it didn't fit in the plate which was
already the size of a 15" pizza! Eric was treated to a
massive portion of Cajun chicken with chips and salad.
He was so impressed that he kept repeating that you
wouldn't get portions like that in France. Well done
Britain you beat the French again!

After all that food we quickly fell asleep under some
trees, but this time surrounded by the Embankment and
Green Death amphitheatres of the quarry. What a
pleasant night (well, it would have been without the
few midgets that appeared from nowhere!).

The next morning Eric was so full of energy that he
went for Covent Garden (VS 4b) sending it in style. I
then decided to go for a revenge attempt at the little
'mantelshelf' of Great Portland Street. I saw some
people doing it the previous day and I memorized
everyone of their moves. After making use of a tiny
foothold that I had ignored the previous day I
suddenly found myself doing the move effortlessly! I
was exhilarated thinking that I had done all the hard
work. The happiness slowly turned to terror as I
climbed throught the 'exquisite' corner groove to find
myself surroudend by sheer rock faces withouth the
slightliest possibility of protection! A couple of
moves and I reached an ancient looking peg. Clipped.
Another metre up above and I found a microscopic crack
where I placed even more microscopic nuts (this is
what I call psycological protection). Breath deeply
and sprint through to the top, with another round of
unprotectable mantelshelves! GRRRRR. When I finally
arrived at the summit I was greeted by the merciless
sun and the loose rocks. Inside my skull felt like pop
corns blowing up.

After so much stress an such a neuron frying
experience, I had more than what I had bargained for!
I knew my mental skills were depleted for trad
climbing so all the leading work was kindly passed
onto Eric. He readily accepted the challenge and went
on to take out Gimcrack (VS 4c) and Scoop Crack (VS
4b), the latter the longest climb we tried, well over
30m, and with the summit nicely topped with loosely
bound rock waiting for the smallest disturbance to
fall off onto unsuspecting climbers below. Loose rock
is a problem at the top of all routes (the rock at the
routes themselves is incredibly hard and sound), so
good belaying skills and a helmet are a must.

As we finish and started packing our bags I had a
final look at the spectacular climbs waiting there for
the taking. The next ones in my wish list include
Great North Road (HVS 5a), 32m high, with a nice
little roof to be overcome right at the top; and
Embankment 3 (E1 5b), with some fierce finger jamming
surely involved. I could not take my eyes off
futuristic prospects such as The Masters Edge (E7 6c),
and immaculate unprotected arete, where the legendary
(perhaps greatest rock climber who ever lived)
Wolfgang Gullich broke his back. A place to rember and
a place to return to.

Well, as we walked towards the car park we thought
everything was finished but one final adventure was
waiting for your unsuspecting storyteller. Our
Sheffield to London bus was departing at 6:20pm, and
we arrived at the Surprise Car Park at 5:00pm in order
to catch the 5:24pm 272 bus back to town. Well, we
waited enjoying our icecreams for the bus, and waited,
and waited, and waited ... At 5:30 we were a bit
worried. At 5:35 we were a bit uneasy (it takes 25 min
to get to Sheffield). At 5:40 there were alarm bells
ringuing. The 6:20 bus to London was the last one, and
the prospect was to get the train at a whopping £60!
At 5:45 Eric decided that hitchhiking was the only
real option. Surprisingly, at 5:50 a nice chap stopped
and gave us a lift. He happened to be a climber
returning from his last day of work at the Hathersage
climbing shop, preparing to move to London and work
for six months before setting off on a gap year around
the world including Nepal, Thailand, Australia, New
Zealand, Hawaii and the States. This nice chap
happened to live in the outskirts of Sheffield! So he
dropped us at a bus stop where all buses go to the
town centre. 6:00pm. Only 20 min left. Another
stressfull round of minutes, 6:05, only 15 min left.
No buses in sight. 6:08, only 12 min left, the 272
bus, 40 min late, there it comes! Grabbed our bags,
waived maddly at it, but no, it was not to be, he just
speed past us (I'd swear he was doing over 30mph in
that residential area!) How much frustration! 6:09,
only 11 min left, there comes a cab, STOP it! 'How
much to Sheffiled interchange? ' 'Eight quid.' came the
reply. 'Ok mate, we give you £10 and you get us down
there in 10 min!'. The indian driver started off fast,
nice chap, 'I'll do my best' he said. An old couple
driving slowly in front of us, will we ever overtake
them? Yes we did, at 6:15, only 5min left! I can see
the interchange in the distance, its 6:17, a red
light, 3 min left. GRRRR. There we go, 6:18 we are
entering the car park, 6:19 there they are, the
National Express buses to London, get out of the cab,
run, I can't belive it!!!! Put our bags in the boot,
the driver shut it locked, into the bus and off we
went. Such a near miss! Finally, doze off into our
seats, and dream of summer evenings at Millstone Edge
. . .

For those of you interested in having a look there is
a nice topo with with all(?) the crag routes at:

http://www.cragx. com/articles/ issue13/millston e/sectors. htm

Rockfax comments about the routes:

http://www.rockfax. com/databases/ results_crag. html?id=12

Millstone is not just about crags, there are plenty of
boulders, bridging corners, gripping aretes and blank
looking faces, all waiting for the avid climber.

Sorry if this was too long, but I was far too exited
after so much adventure, and had to pour it all out!

Cheers, take care and keep climbing!

Mario.
